transactions that you want to evaluate. ### Testing for indirect bias[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#testing-for-indirect-bias "Copy to clipboard") If you select a field that is not a training feature, called an added field, indirect bias is identified by finding associated values in the training features. For example, the profession “student” may imply a younger individual even though the Age field was excluded from model training. For details on configuring fairness evaluations to consider indirect bias, see [Configuring the Fairness monitor for indirect bias](/docs/en/SSQNUZ_5.0.x/wsj/model/wos-indirect-bias.html). ### Mitigating bias[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#mitigating-bias "Copy to clipboard") Passive and active debiasing are used for traditional model evaluations. Passive debiasing reveals bias, while active debiasing prevents you from carrying that bias forward by changing the model in real time for the current application. For details on interpreting results and mitigating bias in a model, see [Reviewing results from a Fairness evaluation](/docs/en/SSQNUZ_5.0.x/wsj/model/wos-insight-debias.html). ## Configuring fairness evaluations in watsonx.governance[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#configuring-fairness-evaluations-in-watsonxgovernance "Copy to clipboard") When you [evaluate prompt templates](/docs/en/SSQNUZ_5.0.x/wsj/model/wos-eval-prompt.html), you can review a summary of fairness evaluation results for the text classification tasks. ### Select favorable and unfavorable outcomes[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#select-favorable-and-unfavorable-outcomes-2 "Copy to clipboard") You must specify favorable and unfavorable outcomes when configure fairness evaluations. The values that represent a favorable outcome are derived from the `label` column in the test data that you provide. By default the `predictedLabel` column is set as the `prediction` column. Favorable and unfavorable values must be specified by using the value of the `prediction` column as a string data type, such as `0` or `1` when you are uploading training data. ### Select meta-fields[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#select-meta-fields "Copy to clipboard") You must select meta-fields to enable watsonx.governance to identify fields that are not specified as features in the test data that you provide. ### Set fairness thresholds[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#set-fairness-thresholds "Copy to clipboard") To configure fairness evaluations with your own settings, you can set a minimum and maximum sample size for each metric. The minimum or maximum sample size indicates the minimum or maximum number of model transactions that you want to evaluate. You can also configure baseline data and set threshold values for each metric. Threshold values create alerts on the evaluation summary page that apper when metric scores violate your thresholds. You must set the values between the range of 0 to 1. The metric scores must be lower than the threshold values to avoid violations. ### Set sample size[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#set-sample-size-2 "Copy to clipboard") Watsonx.governance uses sample sizes to understand how to process the number of transactions that are evaluated during evaluations. You must set a minimum sample size to indicate the lowest number of transactions that you want watsonx.governance to evaluate. You can also set a maximum sample size to indicate the maximum number of transactions that you want watsonx.governance to evaluate. ## Supported fairness metrics[](/docs/en/cloud-paks/cp-data/5.0.x?topic=evaluations-fairness#anlz_metrics_supfairmets "Copy to clipboard") Supported languages: English only When you enable fairness evaluations with the Watson OpenScale or watsonx.governance service, you can view a summary of evaluation results with metrics for the type of model that you're evaluating. If you are using the Watson OpenScale service, you can view the results of